FemtoRV/TUTORIALS/FemtoRV32_X.md, before:

Episode X: Adding load and store instructions
------------------------------------------

We are nearly there ! However, adding `load` and `store` requires some drastic additions to the design. Let us start from what's easy, the
instruction decoder. We are generating two additional signals `isLoad` and `isStore`. There are two more cases in the big `switch` statement:

```
           7'b0000011: begin // Load
	      writeBackEn = 1'b1;     // enable write back
	      writeBackSel = 4'b0100; // write back source = RAM
	      aluInSel1 = 1'b0;       // ALU source 1 = reg
	      aluInSel2 = 1'b1;       // ALU source 2 = imm
	      aluSel = 1'b0;          // ALU op = ADD
	      imm = Iimm;             // imm format = I
	      isLoad = 1'b1;
	   end
	 
           7'b0100011: begin // Store
	      writeBackEn = 1'b0;     // disable write back
	      writeBackSel = 4'bxxxx; // write back sel = don't care
	      aluInSel1 = 1'b0;       // ALU source 1 = reg
	      aluInSel2 = 1'b1;       // ALU source 2 = imm
	      aluSel = 1'b0;          // ALU op = ADD
	      imm = Simm;             // imm format = S
	      isStore = 1'b1;
	   end
```

Everything is connected as shown in this schematic. There is a new _memory access subsystem_. To make things easy, we are
going to use different wires for reading and for writing data. 

![](Images/FemtoRV32_design.jpg)

One difficulty remains: the same wires are used to read the instructions and to read the data. How can be route instructions
to the `instr` register and data to register writeback ? To handle that, the finite state machine gets a bit more complicated. 

TO BE CONTINUED.

Commit message:

New figure for step IX (removed memory subsystem from step X)

FemtoRV/TUTORIALS/FemtoRV32_X.md, after:

Episode X: Adding load and store instructions
------------------------------------------

We are nearly there ! However, adding `load` and `store` requires some drastic additions to the design. Let us start from what's easy, the
instruction decoder. We are generating two additional signals `isLoad` and `isStore`. There are two more cases in the big `switch` statement:

```
           7'b0000011: begin // Load
	      writeBackEn = 1'b1;     // enable write back
	      writeBackSel = 4'b0100; // write back source = RAM
	      aluInSel1 = 1'b0;       // ALU source 1 = reg
	      aluInSel2 = 1'b1;       // ALU source 2 = imm
	      aluSel = 1'b0;          // ALU op = ADD
	      imm = Iimm;             // imm format = I
	      isLoad = 1'b1;
	   end
	 
           7'b0100011: begin // Store
	      writeBackEn = 1'b0;     // disable write back
	      writeBackSel = 4'bxxxx; // write back sel = don't care
	      aluInSel1 = 1'b0;       // ALU source 1 = reg
	      aluInSel2 = 1'b1;       // ALU source 2 = imm
	      aluSel = 1'b0;          // ALU op = ADD
	      imm = Simm;             // imm format = S
	      isStore = 1'b1;
	   end
```

Everything is connected as shown in this schematic. There is a new _memory access subsystem_.
The mux for register write back has a new path (read mem data). Then
we just need to draw two wires, one from the second register output to
the written mem data, and another one from the ALU output to the mem
address. Note that we use different wires for reading (read mem data)
and for writing (write mem data). We use two single-directional data buses 
instead of a single bidirectional data bus.

![](Images/FemtoRV32_design.jpg)

One difficulty remains: the same wires are used to read the instructions and to read the data. How can be route instructions
to the `instr` register and data to register writeback ? To handle that, the finite state machine gets a bit more complicated. 

TO BE CONTINUED.
