FemtoRV/TUTORIALS/toolchain.md, before:

Installing open-source tools for FPGA development
=================================================

_Note: the following instructions are for Linux (I'm using Ubuntu).
Windows users can run the tutorial using WSL. It requires some
adaptation, as explained [here](WSL.md)._

Before starting, you will need to install the OpenSource FPGA
development tools. You will need the following components:
- Verilog compilation and synthesis: Yosys
- Debugging tools: icarus/iverilog and verilator
- FPGA support libraries: IceStorm (Ice40) or Trellis (ECP5)
- Place and root: NextPNR
- Tool to send bitstream to FPGA: ujprog 

Although there exists some precompiled packages, I highly recommend to
get fresh source versions from the source repositories, because the tools
quickly evolve and get better and better ! What follows is a set of
instructions to get and install the latest versions of the tools.
Some steps depend on the type of FPGA installed on your board, refer to
the following table:

| Board     | FPGA family   |
|-----------|---------------|
|IceStick   | Ice40         |
|IceBreaker | Ice40         |
|IceFeather | Ice40         |
|FOMU       | Ice40         |
|ULX3S      | ECP5          |
|OrangeCrab | ECP5          |
|ECP5-EVN   | ECP5          |
|ARTY       | artix-7 (xc7) |

Step 1: FemtoRV
===============
```
$ git clone https://github.com/BrunoLevy/learn-fpga.git
```

For ARTY only
=============

- For the ARTY FPGA family, follow [this link](toolchain_arty.md).
- For other FPGA families, follow the steps below:

Step 2: Yosys and companions
============================


Follow setup instructions from [yosys website](https://github.com/YosysHQ/yosys)

*TL;DR*

Install prerequisites:
```
$ sudo apt-get install build-essential clang bison flex \
  libreadline-dev gawk tcl-dev libffi-dev git \
  graphviz xdot pkg-config python3 libboost-system-dev \
  libboost-python-dev libboost-filesystem-dev zlib1g-dev
```
Get the sources:
```
$ git clone https://github.com/YosysHQ/yosys.git
```
Compile and install it:
```
$ cd yosys
$ make
$ sudo make install
```
icarus/iverilog and verilator
-----------------------------
We will need also analysis and simulation tools. `icarus/iverilog` can do additional checks at
compile time, and is called by `make lint` in our build system. `verilator` does simulation,
which is vital for debugging. It is also used by the build system to transfer hardware configuration
parameters to the firmware.
```
sudo apt-get install iverilog verilator
```

Step 3: FPGA support libraries
==============================

Note that instructions are different, depending on the family of your FPGA:
 - *IceStorm* for Ice40 family (boards: IceStick, IceBreaker, IceFeather, Fomu,...)
 - *Trellis* for ECP5 family (boards: ULX3S, OrangeCrab,...). 

IceStorm (for Ice40 FPGAs)
--------------------------

Follow setup instructions from [icestorm website](https://github.com/YosysHQ/icestorm)

*TL;DR*

Install prerequisites:
```
$ sudo apt-get install build-essential clang bison flex libreadline-dev \
  gawk tcl-dev libffi-dev git mercurial graphviz   \
  xdot pkg-config python python3 libftdi-dev \
  qt5-default python3-dev libboost-all-dev cmake libeigen3-dev
```
Get the sources:
```
$ git clone https://github.com/YosysHQ/icestorm.git
```
Compile and install it:
```
$ cd icestorm
$ make -j 4
$ sudo make install
```

Project Trellis (for ECP5 FPGAs)
--------------------------------

Follow setup instructions from [project trellis website](https://github.com/YosysHQ/prjtrellis)

*TL;DR*

Get the sources:
```
$ git clone --recursive https://github.com/YosysHQ/prjtrellis
```

Compile and install it:
```
$ cd prjtrellis/libtrellis
$ cmake -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX=/usr/local .
$ make
$ sudo make install
```

Step 4: NextPNR
===============

Follow setup instructions from [nextpnr website](https://github.com/YosysHQ/nextpnr)

*TL;DR*


Get the sources:
```
$ git clone --recursive https://github.com/YosysHQ/nextpnr.git
```

NextPNR compilation and installation for Ice40 FPGAs
----------------------------------------------------
Compile and install it:
```
$ cd nextpnr
$ cmake -DARCH=ice40 -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX=/usr/local .
$ make -j 4
$ sudo make install
```

NextPNR compilation and installation for ECP5 FPGAs
---------------------------------------------------
Compile and install it:
```
$ cd nextpnr
$ cmake -DARCH=ecp5 -DTRELLIS_INSTALL_PREFIX=/usr/local -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX=/usr/local -DBUILD_GUI=on .
$ make -j 4
$ sudo make install
```

Step 5: Tool to send bitstream to FPGA
======================================

We need to let normal users program the IceStick through USB. This can be done by
creating a file in `/etc/udev/rules.d`. Instructions are different for different
FPGAs. Then you need a tool to flash the FPGA (see instructions below
to install it). Note: openFPGALoader is a quickly evolving tool that
seems to support most of the FPGAs (TODO: update this tutorial and
instructions with systematic use of openFPGALoader, seems to be the
way to go...).

Ice40 FPGAs (iceprog)
---------------------
Create in `/etc/udev/rules.d` a file `53-lattice-ftdi.rules` 
with the following content:
```
ATTRS{idVendor}=="0403", ATTRS{idProduct}=="6010", MODE="0660", GROUP="plugdev", TAG+="uaccess"
```
_(no additional tool to install, `iceprog` is included in `icestorm` that we installed in step 3)_

FOMU
----
FOMU includes a Ice40up5k FPGA (Ice40 family) but requires different USB rules and tools:

Create in `/etc/udev/rules.d` a file `99-fomu.rules`
with the following content:
```
SUBSYSTEM=="usb", ATTRS{idVendor}=="1209", ATTRS{idProduct}=="5bf0", MODE="0664", GROUP="plugdev"
```

Install dfu-util:
```
$ sudo apt-get install dfu-util  
```

Plug the FOMU and test it:
```
$ dfu-util -l
```
It should display something like:
```
dfu-util 0.9

Copyright 2005-2009 Weston Schmidt, Harald Welte and OpenMoko Inc.
Copyright 2010-2016 Tormod Volden and Stefan Schmidt
This program is Free Software and has ABSOLUTELY NO WARRANTY
Please report bugs to http://sourceforge.net/p/dfu-util/tickets/

Found DFU: [1209:5bf0] ver=0101, devnum=20, cfg=1, intf=0, path="1-1", alt=0, name="Fomu PVT running DFU Bootloader v1.9.1", serial="UNKNOWN"
```

ECP5 FPGAs
----------
Creating in `/etc/udev/rules.d` a file `80-fpga-ulx3s.rules`
with the following content:
```
# this is for usb-serial tty device
SUBSYSTEM=="tty", ATTRS{idVendor}=="0403", ATTRS{idProduct}=="6015", \
  MODE="664", GROUP="dialout"
# this is for ujprog libusb access
ATTRS{idVendor}=="0403", ATTRS{idProduct}=="6015", \
  GROUP="dialout", MODE="666"
```
Now install `ujprog` (the tool to send the bitstream to the FPGA):
```
git clone https://github.com/emard/ulx3s-bin
sudo cp ulx3s-bin/usb-jtag/linux-amd64/ujprog /usr/local/bin
```

All FPGAs
---------
The [OpenFPGALoader](https://github.com/trabucayre/openFPGALoader) supports many FPGAs and is easy to use.
To install it, follow [the documentation](https://github.com/trabucayre/openFPGALoader#compile-and-install),
or (TL;DR):
```
$ git clone https://github.com/trabucayre/openFPGALoader.git
$ apt-get install libftdi1-2 libftdi1-dev libhidapi-libusb0 libhidapi-dev libudev-dev cmake pkg-config make g++
$ cd openFPGALoader
$ mkdir build
$ cd build
$ cmake ../ 
$ make
$ sudo make install
```

To see the list of supported boards:
```
$ openFPGALoader --list-boards
```
To send bitstream to SRAM (program temporarily)
```
$ openFPGALoader --board my_board my_design.bit
```

To send bitstream to FLASH (program permanently)
```
$ openFPGALoader --board my_board -f my_design.bit
```

Wow, super simple ! Love it !

All set !!!
===========
_Pfiuuu, a long journey, time to have fun now_

Commit message:

Updated toolchain installation instruction: using precompiled packages from YosysHQ

FemtoRV/TUTORIALS/toolchain.md, after:

Installing open-source tools for FPGA development
=================================================

Latest news (April 2023): pre-built toolchain for
Ice40 and ECP5-based FPGAs can be downloaded
from [here](https://github.com/YosysHQ/oss-cad-suite-build/releases)
(Windows/Mac/Linux).

Just download the package, and
set the path using `source ~/where/you/unpacked/it/oss-cad-suite/environment`
everytime you want to use it (thanks @mecrisp for pointing at that).

What follows is for folks who want to compile the tools on their own,
or if you have something else than an Ice40 or ECP5 (for instance, an ARTY).

_Note: the following instructions are for Linux (I'm using Ubuntu).
Windows users can run the tutorial using WSL. It requires some
adaptation, as explained [here](WSL.md)._

Before starting, you will need to install the OpenSource FPGA
development tools. You will need the following components:
- Verilog compilation and synthesis: Yosys
- Debugging tools: icarus/iverilog and verilator
- FPGA support libraries: IceStorm (Ice40) or Trellis (ECP5)
- Place and root: NextPNR
- Tool to send bitstream to FPGA: ujprog 

Although there exists some precompiled packages, I highly recommend to
get fresh source versions from the source repositories, because the tools
quickly evolve and get better and better ! What follows is a set of
instructions to get and install the latest versions of the tools.
Some steps depend on the type of FPGA installed on your board, refer to
the following table:

| Board     | FPGA family   |
|-----------|---------------|
|IceStick   | Ice40         |
|IceBreaker | Ice40         |
|IceFeather | Ice40         |
|FOMU       | Ice40         |
|ULX3S      | ECP5          |
|OrangeCrab | ECP5          |
|ECP5-EVN   | ECP5          |
|ARTY       | artix-7 (xc7) |

Step 1: FemtoRV
===============
```
$ git clone https://github.com/BrunoLevy/learn-fpga.git
```

For ARTY only
=============

- For the ARTY FPGA family, follow [this link](toolchain_arty.md).
- For other FPGA families, follow the steps below:

Step 2: Yosys and companions
============================


Follow setup instructions from [yosys website](https://github.com/YosysHQ/yosys)

*TL;DR*

Install prerequisites:
```
$ sudo apt-get install build-essential clang bison flex \
  libreadline-dev gawk tcl-dev libffi-dev git \
  graphviz xdot pkg-config python3 libboost-system-dev \
  libboost-python-dev libboost-filesystem-dev zlib1g-dev
```
Get the sources:
```
$ git clone https://github.com/YosysHQ/yosys.git
```
Compile and install it:
```
$ cd yosys
$ make
$ sudo make install
```
icarus/iverilog and verilator
-----------------------------
We will need also analysis and simulation tools. `icarus/iverilog` can do additional checks at
compile time, and is called by `make lint` in our build system. `verilator` does simulation,
which is vital for debugging. It is also used by the build system to transfer hardware configuration
parameters to the firmware.
```
sudo apt-get install iverilog verilator
```

Step 3: FPGA support libraries
==============================

Note that instructions are different, depending on the family of your FPGA:
 - *IceStorm* for Ice40 family (boards: IceStick, IceBreaker, IceFeather, Fomu,...)
 - *Trellis* for ECP5 family (boards: ULX3S, OrangeCrab,...). 

IceStorm (for Ice40 FPGAs)
--------------------------

Follow setup instructions from [icestorm website](https://github.com/YosysHQ/icestorm)

*TL;DR*

Install prerequisites:
```
$ sudo apt-get install build-essential clang bison flex libreadline-dev \
  gawk tcl-dev libffi-dev git mercurial graphviz   \
  xdot pkg-config python python3 libftdi-dev \
  qt5-default python3-dev libboost-all-dev cmake libeigen3-dev
```
Get the sources:
```
$ git clone https://github.com/YosysHQ/icestorm.git
```
Compile and install it:
```
$ cd icestorm
$ make -j 4
$ sudo make install
```

Project Trellis (for ECP5 FPGAs)
--------------------------------

Follow setup instructions from [project trellis website](https://github.com/YosysHQ/prjtrellis)

*TL;DR*

Get the sources:
```
$ git clone --recursive https://github.com/YosysHQ/prjtrellis
```

Compile and install it:
```
$ cd prjtrellis/libtrellis
$ cmake -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX=/usr/local .
$ make
$ sudo make install
```

Step 4: NextPNR
===============

Follow setup instructions from [nextpnr website](https://github.com/YosysHQ/nextpnr)

*TL;DR*


Get the sources:
```
$ git clone --recursive https://github.com/YosysHQ/nextpnr.git
```

NextPNR compilation and installation for Ice40 FPGAs
----------------------------------------------------
Compile and install it:
```
$ cd nextpnr
$ cmake -DARCH=ice40 -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX=/usr/local .
$ make -j 4
$ sudo make install
```

NextPNR compilation and installation for ECP5 FPGAs
---------------------------------------------------
Compile and install it:
```
$ cd nextpnr
$ cmake -DARCH=ecp5 -DTRELLIS_INSTALL_PREFIX=/usr/local -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX=/usr/local -DBUILD_GUI=on .
$ make -j 4
$ sudo make install
```

Step 5: Tool to send bitstream to FPGA
======================================

We need to let normal users program the IceStick through USB. This can be done by
creating a file in `/etc/udev/rules.d`. Instructions are different for different
FPGAs. Then you need a tool to flash the FPGA (see instructions below
to install it). Note: openFPGALoader is a quickly evolving tool that
seems to support most of the FPGAs (TODO: update this tutorial and
instructions with systematic use of openFPGALoader, seems to be the
way to go...).

Ice40 FPGAs (iceprog)
---------------------
Create in `/etc/udev/rules.d` a file `53-lattice-ftdi.rules` 
with the following content:
```
ATTRS{idVendor}=="0403", ATTRS{idProduct}=="6010", MODE="0660", GROUP="plugdev", TAG+="uaccess"
```
_(no additional tool to install, `iceprog` is included in `icestorm` that we installed in step 3)_

FOMU
----
FOMU includes a Ice40up5k FPGA (Ice40 family) but requires different USB rules and tools:

Create in `/etc/udev/rules.d` a file `99-fomu.rules`
with the following content:
```
SUBSYSTEM=="usb", ATTRS{idVendor}=="1209", ATTRS{idProduct}=="5bf0", MODE="0664", GROUP="plugdev"
```

Install dfu-util:
```
$ sudo apt-get install dfu-util  
```

Plug the FOMU and test it:
```
$ dfu-util -l
```
It should display something like:
```
dfu-util 0.9

Copyright 2005-2009 Weston Schmidt, Harald Welte and OpenMoko Inc.
Copyright 2010-2016 Tormod Volden and Stefan Schmidt
This program is Free Software and has ABSOLUTELY NO WARRANTY
Please report bugs to http://sourceforge.net/p/dfu-util/tickets/

Found DFU: [1209:5bf0] ver=0101, devnum=20, cfg=1, intf=0, path="1-1", alt=0, name="Fomu PVT running DFU Bootloader v1.9.1", serial="UNKNOWN"
```

ECP5 FPGAs
----------
Creating in `/etc/udev/rules.d` a file `80-fpga-ulx3s.rules`
with the following content:
```
# this is for usb-serial tty device
SUBSYSTEM=="tty", ATTRS{idVendor}=="0403", ATTRS{idProduct}=="6015", \
  MODE="664", GROUP="dialout"
# this is for ujprog libusb access
ATTRS{idVendor}=="0403", ATTRS{idProduct}=="6015", \
  GROUP="dialout", MODE="666"
```
Now install `ujprog` (the tool to send the bitstream to the FPGA):
```
git clone https://github.com/emard/ulx3s-bin
sudo cp ulx3s-bin/usb-jtag/linux-amd64/ujprog /usr/local/bin
```

All FPGAs
---------
The [OpenFPGALoader](https://github.com/trabucayre/openFPGALoader) supports many FPGAs and is easy to use.
To install it, follow [the documentation](https://github.com/trabucayre/openFPGALoader#compile-and-install),
or (TL;DR):
```
$ git clone https://github.com/trabucayre/openFPGALoader.git
$ apt-get install libftdi1-2 libftdi1-dev libhidapi-libusb0 libhidapi-dev libudev-dev cmake pkg-config make g++
$ cd openFPGALoader
$ mkdir build
$ cd build
$ cmake ../ 
$ make
$ sudo make install
```

To see the list of supported boards:
```
$ openFPGALoader --list-boards
```
To send bitstream to SRAM (program temporarily)
```
$ openFPGALoader --board my_board my_design.bit
```

To send bitstream to FLASH (program permanently)
```
$ openFPGALoader --board my_board -f my_design.bit
```

Wow, super simple ! Love it !

All set !!!
===========
_Pfiuuu, a long journey, time to have fun now_
