FemtoRV/FIRMWARE/LiteX/DemoBundle/README.md, before:

Demo bundle firmware for LiteX
===============================

This firmware for LiteX contains a bundle of small demo programs, that can be used to
test and benchmark different cores. Some of them display graphic effects on the SSD1331
OLED display if it is plugged and configured. 

| demo           | description                            | comments                       |
|----------------|----------------------------------------|--------------------------------|
|tinyraytracer   | raytracer by Dmitry Sololov            | textmode (+ OLED if configured)|
|raystones       | raytracer perf test                    | can be used to benchmark cores |
|oled_test       | tests OLED screen                      | only if OLED configured        |
|oled_riscv_logo | 90-ish rotozoom demo                   | only if OLED configured        |
|oled_julia      | animated Julia set by Sylvain Lefebvre | only if OLED configured        |


tinyraytracer / raystones
-------------------------
It is a C version of Dmitry Sokolov's [tinyraytracer](https://github.com/ssloy/tinyraytracer), adapted to LiteX.
It can be used to benchmark different cores running on LiteX.
Raytracing is interesting for benchmarking cores, because it
massively uses floating point operations, either implemented in
software or by an FPU.

Step 0: synthethize
-------------------
Follow the instructions [here](https://github.com/BrunoLevy/learn-fpga/blob/master/FemtoRV/TUTORIALS/litex.md).
If you have the small OLED display plugged on the ULX3S (reference `SSD1331`), 
you can add the `--with-oled` option to the command line. 

Step 1: compile
---------------
```
$ make BUILD_DIR=<path where you synthesized LiteX> 
```
(for instance, `LiteX/build/radiona_ulx3s`). 

Alternatively, you can edit `Makefile` and hardwire `LITEX_DIR` and `LITEX_PLATFORM`.

If everything goes well, this will generate `demo.bin`.

Step 2: execute
---------------

```
$ lxterminal --kernel demo.bin /dev/ttyUSBnn
litex> reboot
litex-demo-bundle> tinyraytracer
```
This will display the result in the terminal window (with BIG pixels
!). This is text mode, with escape sequences to change the background
color. If you have the small OLED display plugged in and configured, 
you will see also the image on it. 

Alternatively, you can use:
```
litex-demo-bundle> raystones
```
This will compute the image without rendering in the terminal
(rendering in the terminal takes time for some reasons, and if you 
want to compare the performances of cores, you want timings that are
as precise as possible).

Performance is measured in "raystones", i.e. pixels per seconds per
MHz (not an official unit !).

If you have the small SSD1331 OLED screen connected on the ULX3S, and if
you have synthesized LiteX with the flag to support it (`--with-oled`), 
then the firmware comes with other graphic demos, type `help` to see the list.

If you test multiple cores, do not forget to recompile the software:
```
$ make clean all
```

Compilation flags are adapted to the configured core (for instance,
RV32I, RV32IM, RV32IMC, RV32IMFC ...). If it crashes, it may be 
because you executed code compiled with flags that are not supported
by the configured core (for instance, play with femtorv32-petitbateau
that supports RV32IMFC, then switch to femtorv32-quark but load the
software that was compiled for petitbateau).

Commit message:

- Updated doc for LiteX - Added Mandelbrot to the demo bundle

FemtoRV/FIRMWARE/LiteX/DemoBundle/README.md, after:

Demo bundle firmware for LiteX
===============================

This firmware for LiteX contains a bundle of small demo programs, that can be used to
test and benchmark different cores. Some of them display graphic effects on the SSD1331
OLED display if it is plugged and configured. Some others (tinyraytracer and mandebrot)
display the result on the OLED screen (if configured) and in the 
console (using ANSI color codes, this makes BIG pixels !).

| demo           | description                            | comments                       |
|----------------|----------------------------------------|--------------------------------|
|tinyraytracer   | raytracer by Dmitry Sololov            | textmode (+ OLED if configured)|
|mandelbrot      | fixed-point Mandelbrot set             | textmode (+ OLED if configured)|
|raystones       | raytracer perf test                    | can be used to benchmark cores |
|oled_test       | tests OLED screen                      | only if OLED configured        |
|oled_riscv_logo | 90-ish rotozoom demo                   | only if OLED configured        |
|oled_julia      | animated Julia set by Sylvain Lefebvre | only if OLED configured        |


tinyraytracer / raystones
-------------------------
It is a C version of Dmitry Sokolov's [tinyraytracer](https://github.com/ssloy/tinyraytracer), adapted to LiteX.
It can be used to benchmark different cores running on LiteX.
Raytracing is interesting for benchmarking cores, because it
massively uses floating point operations, either implemented in
software or by an FPU.

Step 0: synthethize
-------------------
Follow the instructions [here](https://github.com/BrunoLevy/learn-fpga/blob/master/FemtoRV/TUTORIALS/litex.md).
If you have the small OLED display plugged on the ULX3S (reference `SSD1331`), 
you can add the `--with-oled` option to the command line. 

Step 1: compile
---------------
```
$ make BUILD_DIR=<path where you synthesized LiteX> 
```
(for instance, `LiteX/build/radiona_ulx3s`). 

Alternatively, you can edit `Makefile` and hardwire `LITEX_DIR` and `LITEX_PLATFORM`.

If everything goes well, this will generate `demo.bin`.

Step 2: execute
---------------

```
$ lxterminal --kernel demo.bin /dev/ttyUSBnn
litex> reboot
litex-demo-bundle> tinyraytracer
```
This will display the result in the terminal window (with BIG pixels
!). This is text mode, with escape sequences to change the background
color. If you have the small OLED display plugged in and configured, 
you will see also the image on it. 

Alternatively, you can use:
```
litex-demo-bundle> raystones
```
This will compute the image without rendering in the terminal
(rendering in the terminal takes time for some reasons, and if you 
want to compare the performances of cores, you want timings that are
as precise as possible).

Performance is measured in "raystones", i.e. pixels per seconds per
MHz (not an official unit !).

If you have the small SSD1331 OLED screen connected on the ULX3S, and if
you have synthesized LiteX with the flag to support it (`--with-oled`), 
then the firmware comes with other graphic demos, type `help` to see the list.

If you test multiple cores, do not forget to recompile the software:
```
$ make clean all
```

Compilation flags are adapted to the configured core (for instance,
RV32I, RV32IM, RV32IMC, RV32IMFC ...). If it crashes, it may be 
because you executed code compiled with flags that are not supported
by the configured core (for instance, play with femtorv32-petitbateau
that supports RV32IMFC, then switch to femtorv32-quark but load the
software that was compiled for petitbateau).
